36.
If Elizabeth, when Mr. Darcy gave her the letter, did not expect it to contain a renewal
of his offers, she had formed no expectation at all of its contents. But such as they were,
it may well be supposed how eagerly she went through them, and what a contrarity of emotion
they excited. Her feelings, as she read, were scarcely to be defined. With amazement did she
first understand that he believed any apology to be in his power, and steadfastly was she persuaded
that he could have no explanation to give which a just sense of shame would not conceal.
With a strong prejudice against everything he might say, she began his account of what had
happened at Netherfield. She read with an eagerness which hardly left her power of comprehension,
and from impatience of knowing what the next sentence might bring,
was incapable of attending to the sense of the one before her eyes.
His belief of her sister's insensibility she instantly resolved to be false,
and his account of the real, the worst objections the match, made her too angry to have any wish
of doing him justice. He expressed no regret for what he had done which satisfied her.
His style was not penitent, but haughty. It was all pride and insolence.
But when this subject was succeeded by his account of Mr. Wickham, when she read with somewhat
clearer attention a relation of events which, if true, must overthrow every cherished opinion
of his worth, and which bore so alarming an affinity to his own history of himself,
her feelings were yet more acutely painful and more difficult of definition. Astonishment,
apprehension, and even horror oppressed her. She wished to discredit it entirely,
repeatedly exclaiming, This must be false. This cannot be. This must be the grossest falsehood.
And when she had gone through the whole letter, though scarcely knowing anything of the last
page or two, put it hastily away, protesting that she would not regard it, that she would
never look at it again. In this perturbed state of mind, with thoughts that could rest on nothing,
she walked on, but it would not do. In half a minute the letter was unfolded again,
and collecting herself as well as she could, she again began the mortifying perusal of all
that related to Wickham, and commanded herself so far as to examine the meaning of every sentence.
The account of his connection with the Pemberley family was exactly what he had related himself.
And the kindness of the late Mr. Darcy, though she had not before known its extent, agreed
equally well with his own words. So far each recital confirmed the other, but when she came
to the will the difference was great. What Wickham had said of the living was fresh in her memory,
and as she recalled his very words, it was impossible not to feel that there was gross
duplicity on one side or the other, and for a few moments she flattered herself that her wishes did
not err. But when she read and re-read with the closest attention the particulars immediately
following of Wickham's resigning all pretensions to the living, of his receiving in lieu so
considerable a sum as three thousand pounds, again she was forced to hesitate. She put down
the letter, weighed every circumstance with what she meant to be impartiality, deliberated on the
probability of each statement, but with little success. On both sides it was only assertion.
Again she read on, but every line proved more clearly that the affair, which she had believed
it impossible that any contrivance could so represent as to render Mr. Darcy's conduct in
it less than infamous, was capable of a turn which must make him entirely blameless throughout the
whole. The extravagance and general profligacy which he scrupled not to lay at Mr. Wickham's
charge exceedingly shocked her, the more so as she could bring no proof of its injustice.
She had never heard of him before his entrance into the shire militia in which he had engaged
at the persuasion of the young man who, on meeting him accidentally in town, had there renewed a
slight acquaintance. Of his former way of life nothing had been known in Hertfordshire but what
he told himself. As to his real character, had information been in her power, she had never felt
wish of inquiring. His countenance, voice, and manner had established him at once in the possession
of every virtue. She tried to recollect some instance of goodness, some distinguished trait
of integrity or benevolence that might rescue him from the attacks of Mr. Darcy, or at least by the
virtue, atone for those casual errors under which she would endeavour to class what Mr. Darcy had
described as the idleness and vice of many years continuing. But no such recollection
refriended her. She could see him instantly before her in every charm of air and address,
but she could remember no more substantial good than the general approbation of the neighbourhood,
and the regard which his social powers had gained him in the mess.
After pausing on this point a considerable while, she once more continued to read, but alas,
the story which followed, of his designs on Miss Darcy, received some confirmation from what had
passed between Colonel Fitzwilliam and herself only the morning before, and at last she was
referred for the truth of every particular to Colonel Fitzwilliam himself, from whom she had
previously received the information of his near concern in all his cousin's affairs, and whose
character she had no reason to question. At one time she had almost resolved on applying to him,
but the idea was checked by the awkwardness of the application, and at length wholly banished
by the conviction that Mr. Darcy would never have hazarded such a proposal he had not been
well assured of his cousin's corroboration. She perfectly remembered everything that had
passed in conversation between Wickham and herself in their first evening at Mr. Phillips's.
Many of his expressions were still fresh in her memory. She was now struck with the impropriety
such communications to a stranger, and wonder it had escaped her before. She saw the indelicacy
of putting himself forward as he had done, and the inconsistency of his professions with his conduct.
She remembered that he had boasted of having no fear of seeing Mr. Darcy, that Mr. Darcy must
leave the country, but that he should stand his ground, yet he had avoided the Netherfield ball
the very next week. She remembered also that till the Netherfield family had quitted the country,
he had told a story to no one but herself, but that after their removal it had been everywhere
discussed, that he had then no reserves, no scruples in sinking Mr. Darcy's character,
though he had assured her that respect for the father would always prevent his exposing the son.
How differently did everything now appear in that he was concerned. His attentions to Miss King were
now the consequence of views solely and hatefully mercenary, and the mediocrity of her fortune proved
no longer the moderation of his wishes, but his eagerness to grasp at anything. His behaviour to
herself could now have had no tolerable motive. He had either been deceived with regard to her fortune,
or had been gratifying his vanity by encouraging the preference which she believed she had most
incautiously shown. Every lingering struggle in his favour grew fainter and fainter.
And in farther justification of Mr. Darcy, she could not but allow Mr. Bingley, when questioned
by Jane, had long ago asserted his blamelessness in the affair. That proud and repulsive as were
his manners, she had never in the whole course of their acquaintance, an acquaintance which had
latterly brought them much together, and given her a sort of intimacy with his ways, seen anything
that betrayed him to be unprincipled or unjust, anything that spoke him of irreligious or immoral
habits, that among his own connections he was esteemed and valued, that even Wickham had allowed
him merit as a brother, and that she had often heard him speak so affectionately of his sister
as to prove him capable of some amiable feeling. That had his actions been what Mr. Wickham
represented them, so gross a violation of everything right could hardly have been concealed
from the world, and that friendship between a person capable of it and such an amiable man
as Mr. Bingley was incomprehensible. She grew absolutely ashamed of herself, of neither Darcy
nor Wickham could she think without feeling she had been blind, partial, prejudiced, absurd.
How despicably I have acted, she cried, I who have prided myself on my discernment,
I who have valued myself on my abilities. From herself to Jane, from Jane to Bingley,
her thoughts were in a line which soon brought to her recollection that Mr. Darcy's explanation
there had appeared very insufficient, and she read it again. Widely different was the effect
of the second perusal. How could she deny that credit to his assertions, in one instance,
which she had been obliged to give in the other? He declared himself to be totally unsuspicious
of her sister's attachment, and she could not help remembering what Charlotte's opinion had
always been. Neither could she deny the justice of his description of Jane. She felt that Jane's
feelings, though fervent, were little displayed, and that there was a constant complacency in her
air and manner not often united with great sensibility. When she came to that part of the
letter, in which her family were mentioned in terms of such mortifying, yet merited reproach,
her sense of shame was severe. The justice of the charge struck her too forcibly for denial,
and the circumstances to which he particularly alluded as having passed at the Netherfield ball,
and as confirming all his first disapprobation, could not have made a stronger impression on his
than on hers. The compliment to herself and her sister was not unfelt. It soothed,
but it could not console her for the contempt which had thus been self-attracted by the rest
of her family. And as she considered that Jane's disappointment had in fact been the work of her
nearest relations, and reflected how materially the credit of both must be hurt by such impropriety of
she felt depressed beyond anything she had ever known. After wandering along the lane for two
hours, giving way to every variety of thought, reconsidering events, determining probabilities,
and reconciling herself, as well as she could, to a change so sudden and so important,
fatigue and a recollection of her long absence made her at length return home,
and she entered the house with the wish of appearing cheerful as usual,
and the resolution of repressing such reflections as must make her unfit for conversation.
She was immediately told that the two gentlemen from Rosings had each called during her absence,
Mr. Darcy only for a few minutes to take leave, but that Colonel Fitzwilliam had been sitting
with them at least an hour, hoping for her return, and almost resolving to walk after
her till she could be found. Elizabeth could but just affect concern in missing him.
She really rejoiced at it. Colonel Fitzwilliam was no longer an object. She could think only of her
better.
The two gentlemen left Rosings the next morning, and Mr. Collins, having been in waiting near the
lodges to make them his parting obeisance, was able to bring home the pleasing intelligence of
their appearing in very good health and in as tolerable spirits as could be expected
after the melancholy scenes so lately gone through at Rosings. To Rosings he then hastened
to console Lady Catherine and her daughter, and on his return brought back with great satisfaction
a message from her ladyship, importing that she felt herself so dull as to make her very
desirous of having them all to dine with her. Elizabeth could not see Lady Catherine without
recollecting that, had she chosen it, she might by this time have been presented to her as her
future niece, nor could she think without a smile of what her ladyship's indignation would have been.
What would she have said? How would she have behaved? Were questions with which she amused
herself. Their first subject was the diminution of the Rosings party.
I assure you I feel it exceedingly, said Lady Catherine. I believe no one feels the loss of
friends as much as I do, but I am particularly attached to these young men and know them to be
so much attached to me. They were excessively sorry to go, but so they always are. The dear
Colonel rallied his spirits tolerably till just at last, but Darcy seemed to feel it more acutely,
I think than last year. His attachment to Rosings certainly increases.
Mr. Collins had a compliment and an allusion to throw in here, which were kindly smiled on by the
mother and daughter. Lady Catherine observed after dinner that Miss Bennet seemed out of spirits
and immediately accounted for it by herself by supposing that she did not like to go home again
so soon, she added. But if that is the case, you must write to your mother and beg that you may
stay a little longer. Mrs. Collins will be very glad of your company, I am sure.
I am much obliged to your ladyship for your kind invitation, replied Elizabeth,
but it is not in my power to accept it. I must be in town next Saturday.
Why, at that rate, you will have been here only six weeks. I expected you to stay two months,
I told Mrs. Collins so before you came. There can be no occasion for your going so soon.
Mrs. Bennet could certainly spare you for another fortnight.
But my father cannot. He wrote last week to hurry my return.
Oh, your father of course may spare you if your mother can. Daughters are never of so
consequence to a father, and if you will stay another month complete, it will be in my power
to take one of you as far as London, for I am going there early in June for a week, and as
Dawson does not object to the baroque box, there will be very good room for one of you, and indeed,
if the weather should happen to be cool, I should not object to taking you both, as you are neither
of you large. You are all kindness, ma'am, but I believe we must abide by our original plan.
Lady Catherine seemed resigned. Mrs. Collins, you must send a servant for them. You know,
I always speak my mind, and I cannot bear the idea of two young women travelling post by
themselves. It is highly improper. You must contrive to send somebody. I have the greatest
dislike in the world to that sort of thing. Young women should always be properly guarded
and attended, according to their situation in life. When my niece Georgina went to Ramsgate
last summer, I made a point of having two men servants go with her. Miss Darcy, the daughter
of Mr. Darcy of Pemberley and Lady Anne, could not have appeared with propriety in a different manner.
I am excessively attentive to all those things. You must send John with the young ladies, Mrs.
Collins. I am glad it occurred to me to mention it, for it would really be discreditable to you
to let them go alone. My uncle is to send a servant for us. Oh, your uncle? He keeps a man
servant, does he? I am very glad you have somebody who thinks of these things. Where shall you change
Oh, Bromley, of course. If you mention my name at the bell, you will be attended to.
Lady Catherine had many other questions to ask, respecting their journey, and as she did not answer
them all herself, attention was necessary, which Elizabeth believed to be lucky for her.
Or, with a mind so occupied, she might have forgotten where she was. Reflection must be
reserved for solitary hours. Whenever she was alone, she gave way to it as the greatest relief.
And not a day went by without a solitary walk, in which she might indulge in all the delight of
unpleasant recollections. Mr. Darcy's letter she was in a fair way of soon knowing by heart.
She studied every sentence, and her feelings towards its writer were at times widely different.
When she remembered the style of his address, she was still full of indignation. But when she
considered how unjustly she had condemned and upbraided him, her anger was turned against herself,
and his disappointed feelings became the object of compassion. His attachment excited gratitude,
his general character respect, but she could not approve him, nor could she for a moment
repent her refusal or feel the slightest inclination ever to see him again.
In her own past behaviour, there was a constant source of vexation and regret,
and in the unhappy defects of her family a subject of yet heavier chagrin. They were
hopeless of remedy. Her father, contented with laughing at them, would never exert himself to
restrain the wild giddiness of his youngest daughters, and her mother, with manners so far
from right herself, was entirely insensible to the evil. Elizabeth had frequently united with
Jane in an endeavour to check the imprudence of Catherine and Lydia, but while they were supported
by their mother's indulgence, what chance could there be of improvement? Catherine, weak-spirited,
irritable and completely under Lydia's guidance, had always been affronted by their advice,
and Lydia, self-willed and careless, would scarcely give them a hearing. They were ignorant,
idle and vain. While there was an officer in Meryton, they would flirt with him,
and while Meryton was within a walk of Longbourn, they would be going there forever.
Anxiety on Jane's behalf was another prevailing concern,
and Mr. Darcy's explanation, by restoring Bingley to all her former good opinion,
heightened the sense of what Jane had lost. His affection was proved to have been sincere,
and his conduct cleared of all blame, unless any could attach to the implicitness of his confidence
in his friend. How grievous, then, was the thought that, of a situation so desirable
in every respect, so replete with advantage, so promising for her happiness,
Jane had been deprived by the folly and indecorum of her own family.
When to these recollections was added the development of Wickham's character,
it may be easily believed that the happy spirits, which had seldom been depressed before,
were now so much affected as to make it impossible for her to appear tolerably cheerful.
Their engagements at Rosings were as frequent during the last week of their stay
as they had been at first. The very last evening was spent there, and her ladyship again inquired
minutely into the particulars of their journey, gave them directions as to the best method of
packing, and was so urgent on the necessity of placing gowns in the only right way that
Maria thought herself obliged on her return to undo all the work of the morning and pack her
trunk afresh. When they parted, Lady Catherine, with great condescension, wished them a good
journey, and invited them to come to Huntsford again next year, and Miss de Bourgh exerted herself
so far as to curtsy and hold out her hand to both. End of chapter 37